Newsletters: add 348 (2025-04-04) (#2254)
bitcoinops/bitcoinops.github.io: _posts/en/newsletters/2025-04-04-newsletter.md

---
title: 'Bitcoin Optech Newsletter #348'
permalink: /en/newsletters/2025/04/04/
name: 2025-04-04-newsletter
slug: 2025-04-04-newsletter
type: newsletter
layout: newsletter
lang: en
---
This week's newsletter FIXME

## News

- secp256k1lab FIXME:harding

## Changing consensus

_A monthly section summarizing proposals and discussion about changing
Bitcoin's consensus rules._

- **Multiple discussion about quantum computer theft and resistance:**
  several conversations examined how Bitcoiners could respond to quantum
  computers becoming powerful enough to allow stealing bitcoins.

  - *Should vulnerable bitcoins be destroyed?* Jameson Lopp [posted][lopp
    destroy] to the Bitcoin-Dev mailing list several arguments for the

>     destruction of bitcoins vulnerable to quantum theft after an upgrade

Reviewer: What follows is an excellent summary of Lopp's post; I'm wondering if we should mention here that his proposal would be a soft fork (he mentions that several times)? Also, it might help future searches of the Optech archive to work in at least some of the words "burn", "unspendable", "freeze", or "frozen" somewhere here.

    path to [quantum resistance][topic quantum resistance] has been
    adopted and users have had time to adopt the solution.  Some
    arguments include:

    - *Argument from common preference:* he believes most people would
      prefer that their funds be destroyed rather than stolen by someone
      with a fast quantum computer.  Especially, he argues, since the

>       thief will be it the set of "the few privileged folks who gain

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      thief will be in the set of "the few privileged folks who gain
```

      early access to quantum computers".

    - *Argument from common harm:* many of the stolen bitcoins will have
      been either lost coins or those that were planned to be held
      long-term.  By contrast, the thieves might quickly spend their
      stolen bitcoins, resulting in reduced purchasing power for other
      bitcoins (similar to money supply inflation).  He notes that lower
      purchasing power of bitcoins reduces miner income, reducing
      network security, and (in his observation) results in lower
      merchant acceptance of bitcoins.

    - *Argument from minimal benefit:* although allowing theft could be
      used to fund the development of quantum computing, stealing coins
      does not provide any direct benefit to honest participants in the
      Bitcoin protocol.

    - *Argument from clear deadlines:* nobody can know far in advance
      the date at which someone with a quantum computer can begin
      stealing bitcoins, but a specific date at which quantum-vulnerable
      coins will be destroyed can be announced far in advance with

>       perfect precision.  That clear deadline will provide more
>       incentive for users to upgrade in time, ensuring fewer total coins

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      perfect precision.  That clear deadline will
      incentivize users to move their coins in time, ensuring fewer total coins
```
(to me, "upgrade" sounds like installing new software, but I think what's meant is moving coins to QR-safe UTXOs)

      are lost.

    - *Argument from miner incentives:* as noted above, quantum theft
      would likely reduce miner income.  A persistent majority of
      hashrate can censor spending of quantum-vulnerable bitcoins, which
      they might do even if the rest of Bitcoiners prefer a different
      outcome.

>     Lopp also provides several arguments against destruction of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Lopp also provides several arguments against the destruction of
```

>     vulnerable Bitcoins, but he concludes in favor of destruction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    vulnerable bitcoins, but he concludes in favor of destruction.
```

>     Nagaev Boris [asks][boris timelock] about whether UTXOs that are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Nagaev Boris [asks][boris timelock] whether UTXOs that are
```

    [timelocked][topic timelocks] beyond the upgrade deadline should
    also be destroyed.  Lopp notes existing pitfalls of long timelocks
    and says he personally gets "a bit nervous locking funds for more
    than a year or two."

  - *Securely proving UTXO ownership by revealing a SHA256 preimage:*
    Martin Habovštiak [posted][habovstiak gfsig] to the Bitcoin-Dev
    mailing list an idea that could allow someone to prove they
    controlled a UTXO even if ECDSA and [schnorr signatures][topic
    schnorr signatures] were insecure (e.g., after fast quantum
    computers existed).  If the UTXO contained a SHA256 commitment (or
    other quantum-resistant commitment) to a preimage that had never
    previously been revealed, then a multistep protocol for revealing

>     that preimage could be used to prevent quantum theft.  This is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    that preimage could prevent quantum theft.  This is
```

    fundamentally the same as a [previous proposal][ruffing gfsig] by
    Tim Ruffing (see [Newsletter #141][news141 gfsig]), which he learned
    is generally known as the [Guy Fawkes signature scheme][].  It's
    also a variant of a [scheme][back crsig] Adam Back invented in 2013
    to improve resistance against miner censorship.  In short, the
    protocol could work like this:

    1. Alice receives funds to an output that, in some way, makes a
       SHA256 commitment.  This can be a directly hashed output, such as
       P2PKH, P2SH, P2WPKH, or P2WSH---or it can be [P2TR][topic
       taproot] output with a script path.

    2. If Alice receives multiple payments to the same output script,
       she must either not spend any of them until she's ready to spend
       all of them (definitely required for P2PKH and P2WSH; probably
       also practically required for P2SH and P2WSH), or she's very
       careful to ensure at least one preimage remains unrevealed by her
       spending (easily possible with P2TR keypath versus scriptpath
       spends).

    3. When Alice is ready to spend, she privately creates her spending

>        transaction in the normal way but does not broadcast it.  She

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       transaction normally but does not broadcast it.  She
```

       also obtains some bitcoin secured by a quantum-secure signature
       algorithm so that she can pay transaction fees.

    4. In a transaction spending some of the quantum-secure bitcoins,

>        she creates a transaction that uses her private knowledge of a

Reviewer 2: In a transaction … creates a transaction?

       preimage to commit quantum-insecure bitcoins she wants to spend
       and also commits to the private spending transaction (without
       revealing it).  She waits for this transaction to be deeply
       confirmed.

>     5. After she's absolutely sure her previous transaction can't

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    5. After she's sure her previous transaction can't
```

       practically be reorged, she reveals her previously private
       preimage and quantum-insecure spend.

    6. Nodes on the network search the blockchain to find the first
       transaction that commits to the preimage.  If that transaction
       commits to Alice's quantum-insecure spend, then they execute her
       spend.  Otherwise, they do nothing.

    This ensures that Alice doesn't have to reveal quantum-vulnerable
    information until after she's already ensured her version of the
    spending transaction will take precedence over any attempted spend
    by the operator of a quantum computer.  For a more precise
    description of the protocol, please see [Ruffing's 2018
    post][ruffing gfsig].  Although not discussed in the thread, we
    believe the above protocol could be deployed as a soft fork.

>     Habovštiak argues that bitcoins which can be securely spent using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Habovštiak argues that bitcoins that can be securely spent using
```

    this protocol (e.g., their preimage hasn't already been revealed)

>     should not be destroyed even if the community decides in wants to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    should not be destroyed even if the community decides it wants to
```

    destroy quantum-vulnerable bitcoins in general.  He also argues that
    the ability to safely spend some bitcoins in case of emergency
    reduces the urgency of deploying a quantum-resistant scheme in the
    short term.

    Lloyd Fournier [says][fournier gfsig], "if this approach gains
    acceptance I think the main immediate action users can take is to
    move to a taproot wallet" because of its ability to allow keypath
    spending under the current consensus rules, including in the case of
    [address reuse][topic output linking], but also resistance to
    quantum theft if keypath spending is later disabled.

    In a separate thread (see next item), Pieter Wuille [notes][wuille

>     nonpublic] that UTXOs vulnerable to quantum theft also includes keys

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    nonpublic] that UTXOs vulnerable to quantum theft also include keys
```

>     which have not been used publicly but which are known to multiple

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    that have not been used publicly but which are known to multiple
```

    parties, such as in various forms of multisig (including LN,
    [DLCs][topic dlc], and escrow services).

  - *Draft BIP for destroying quantum-insecure bitcoins:* Agustin Cruz
    [posted][cruz qramp] to the Bitcoin-Dev mailing a [draft BIP][cruz
    bip] that describes several options for a general process of

>     destroying bitcoins that are vulnerable to quantum theft (in the
>     event that becomes an expected risk).  Cruz argues, "enforcing a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    destroying bitcoins that are vulnerable to quantum theft (if
    that becomes an expected risk).  Cruz argues, "enforcing a
```

    deadline for migration, we provide rightful owners with a clear,
    non-negotiable opportunity to secure their funds [...] a forced
    migration, with sufficient notice and robust safeguards, is both
    realistic and necessary to protect the long-term security of
    Bitcoin."

    Very little of the discussion on the thread focused on the draft

>     BIP.  Most of it focused on whether or not destruction of quantum

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    BIP.  Most of it focused on whether or not destroying quantum
```
or, "whether or not the destruction of"

    vulnerable bitcoins was a good idea, similar to the thread later
    started by Jameson Lopp (described in a previous sub-item).

- **Multiple discussions about a CTV+CSFS soft fork:** several
  conversations examined various aspects of soft forking in the
  [OP_CHECKTEMPLATEVERIFY][topic op_checktemplateverify] (CTV) and
  [OP_CHECKSIGFROMSTACK][topic op_checksigfromstack] (CSFS) opcodes.

  - *Criticism of CTV motivation:* Anthony Towns [posted][towns ctvmot]
    a criticism of [BIP119][]'s described motivation for CTV, a
    motivation which he argued would be undermined by adding both CTV
    and CSFS to Bitcoin.  Several days after the discussion started,
    BIP119 was updated by its author to remove most (and possibly all)
    of the controversial language; see [Newsletter #347][news347 bip119]
    for our summary of the change and the [older version][bip119

>     prechange] for BIP119 for reference.  Some of the topics discussed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    prechange] of BIP119 for reference.  Some of the topics discussed
```

    included:

>     - *CTV+CSFS allows creation of a perpetual covenant:*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - *CTV+CSFS allows the creation of a perpetual covenant:*
```

      CTV's motivation said, "Covenants have historically been widely
      considered to be unfit for Bitcoin because they are too complex to
      implement and risk reducing the fungibility of coins bound by

>       them.  This BIP introduces a simple covenant called a *template*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      them.  This BIP introduces a simple covenant called a *template*,
```

Author: Leaving as-is.  Quoted text; I sometimes slightly clean up punctuation in quotes but here we make a big deal about preserving the emphasis in the quote, so I want it verbatim.

      significant risk.  BIP119 templates allow for **non-recursive**
      fully-enumerated covenants with no dynamic state" (emphasis in
      original)."

      Towns describes a script using both CTV and CSFS, and links to a
      [transaction][mn recursive] using it on the MutinyNet [signet][topic
      signet], that can only be spent by sending the same amount of
      funds back to the script itself.  Although there was some debate
      about definitions, the author of CTV has [previously
      described][rubin recurse] a functionally identical construction as
      a recursive covenant and Optech followed that convention in its
      summary of that conversation (see [Newsletter #190][news190
      recursive]).

      Olaoluwa Osuntokun [defended][osuntokun enum] CTV's motivation
      related to scripts using it remaining "fully-enumerated" and "with
      no dynamic state".  This appears to be similar to an
      [argument][rubin enumeration] the author of CTV (Jeremy Rubin)
      made in 2022, where he called the type of pay-to-self covenant
      Towns designed "recursive but fully enumerated".  Towns

>       [countered][towns enum] that the addition of CSFS undermines the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      [countered][towns enum] that adding CSFS undermines the
```

      claimed benefit of full enumeration.  He asked for either the CTV
      or CSFS BIPs to be updated to describe any "use cases that are
      somehow both scary and still prevented by the combination of CTV
      and CSFS".  This may have been [done][ctv spookchain] in the
      recent update to BIP119, which describes a "self-reproducing
      automata (colloquially called SpookChains)" that would be possible
      using [SIGHASH_ANYPREVOUT][topic sighash_anyprevout] but which is
      not possible using CTV+CSFS.

    - *Tooling for CTV and CSFS:* Towns [noted][towns ctvmot] that he
      found it difficult to use existing tools to develop his recursive
      script described above, indicating a lack of readiness for
      deployment.  Osuntokun [said][osuntokun enum] the tooling he uses
      is "pretty straight forward".  Neither Towns nor Osuntokun

>       mentioned what tools they used.  Nadav Ivgi [provided][ivgi minsc]

Reviewer 2: "Neither Towns nor Osuntokun mentioned what tools they used." had me laughing out loud.

      an example using his [Minsc][] language and said that he's "been
      working on improving Minsc to make these kind of things easier.
      It supports Taproot, CTV, PSBT, Descriptors, Miniscript, raw
      Script, BIP32, and more." Although he admits "much of it is still
      undocumented".

    - *Alternatives:* Towns compares CTV+CSFS to both his Basic Bitcoin
      Lisp Language ([bll][topic bll]) and [Simplicity][topic
      simplicity], which would provide an alternative scripting
      language.  Antoine Poinsot [suggests][poinsot alt] that an
      alternative language that's easy to reason about may be less risky
      than a small change to the current system, which is hard to reason
      about.  Developer Moonsettler [argues][moonsettler express] that
      incrementally introducing new features to Bitcoin script makes it
      safer to add more features later, as each increase in expressivity
      makes it less likely that we'll encounter a surprise.

>       Both Osuntokun and James O'Beirne [criticize][osuntokun enum] the

Reviewer 2: Just curious, why is sometimes the first name included and sometimes not? I first surmised that it was the first mention vs subsequent mentions, but James’s first name is used multiple times. Is James a special case because his brother also sometimes made Bitcoin news in the past? Or is the approach "full name once per news item, then last name"?

Author: My general rule for linking to things and mentioning full names, is once per thing-that-might-be-read-independently.  In this case, I think the smallest likely unit of independent reading is the bullet "Criticism of CTV motivation"; we introduce Laolu's full name in the fifth paragraph of that bullet (in sub-bullet 1) and the quote above is the first mention of James's, so we use his full name there.

In the next major bullet I think might be read independently, "CTV+CSFS benefits", I reintroduce all of the names.  AntoineP's full name is in para 2 (sub-bullet 1), AJ's and James's full names are in para 3 (sub-bullet 2), etc...

That said, I might not have written (or, more likely, edited) a section in linear order, so I could accidentally overuse full names or topic links, so it never hurts to point out something that seems odd.

    Bitcoin to suggest adding CTV and CSFS to Bitcoin as a first step to
    other changes that would increase expressivity further.  Most of the
    discussion focused on qualifying the possible benefits or CTV, CSFS,
    or both of them together.  This included:

    - *DLCs:* both CTV and CSFS individually can reduce the number of
      signatures needed to create [DLCs][topic dlc], especially DLCs for
      signing large numbers of variants of a contract (e.g., a BTC-USD
      price contract denominated in increments of one dollar).  Antoine
      Poinsot [linked][poinsot ctvcsfs1] to a recent
      [announcement][10101 shutdown] of a DLC service provider shutting
      down as evidence that Bitcoin users don't seem too interested in
      DLCs and linked to a [post][nick dlc] a few months ago from Jonas
      Nick that said, "DLCs have not achieved meaningful adoption on
      Bitcoin, and their limited use doesn't appear to stem from
      performance limitations." Replies linked to other still-functional
      DLC service providers, including one that [claims][lava 30m] to
      have raised "$30M in financing".

>     - *Vaults:* CTV simplifies implementation of [vaults][topic vaults]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - *Vaults:* CTV simplifies the implementation of [vaults][topic vaults]
```

      that are possible today on Bitcoin using presigned transactions
      and (optionally) private key deletion.  Anthony Towns [argues][towns

>       vaults] that type of vault isn't very interesting.  James O'Beirne

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      vaults] that this type of vault isn't very interesting.  James O'Beirne
```

>       vaults] that type of vault isn't very interesting.  James O'Beirne

Reviewer 2: Maybe:
```suggestion
      vaults] that this type of vault isn't very interesting.  James O'Beirne
```

      [counters][obeirne ctv-vaults] that CTV, or something similar, is
      a prerequisite for building more advanced types of vaults, such as
      his [BIP345][] `OP_VAULT` vaults.

    - *Accountable computing contracts:* CSFS can eliminate many steps
      in [accountable computing contracts][topic acc] such as BitVM by
      replacing their current need to perform Script-based lamport

>       signatures.  CTV many be able to reduce some additional signature

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      signatures.  CTV may be able to reduce some additional signature
```

      operations.  Poinsot again [asks][poinsot ctvcsfs1] about whether
      there's significant demand for BitVM.  Gregory Sanders
      [replies][sanders bitvm] that he would find it interesting for
      bidirectional bridging of tokens as part of Shielded [client-side
      validation][topic client-side validation] (see [Newsletter
      #322][news322 csv-bitvm]).  However, he also notes that neither

>       CTV or CSFS significantly improve the trust model of BitVM,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      CTV nor CSFS significantly improves the trust model of BitVM,
```

      whereas other changes might be able to reduce trust or reduce the
      number of expensive operations in other ways.

    - *Improvement in Liquid timelock script:* James O'Beirne
      [relayed][obeirne liquid] comments from two Blockstream engineers
      that CTV would, in his words, "drastically improve the
      [Blockstream] Liquid timelock-fallback script that requires coins
      to be [moved] on a periodic basis."  After requests for
      clarification, former Blockstream engineer Sanket Kanjalkar
      [explained][kanjalkar liquid] that the benefit could be a
      significant reduction in fees.  O'Beirne also [shared][poelstra
      liquid] additional details from Andrew Poelstra, Blockstream's

>       Director of Research.

Reviewer 2: What did those details expound on?

      efficiency.  Gregory Sanders, who implemented an experimental
      version of LN-Symmetry (see [Newsletter #284][news284 lnsym])
      using [SIGHASH_ANYPREVOUT][topic sighash_anyprevout] (APO)
      [notes][sanders versus] that the CTV+CSFS version of LN-Symmetry
      isn't as featureful as the APO version and requires making
      tradeoffs.  Anthony Towns [adds][towns nonrepo] that nobody is
      known to have updated Sanders's experimental code for APO to run
      on modern software and use recently introduced relay features such
      as [TRUC][topic v3 transaction relay] and [ephemeral
      anchors][topic ephemeral anchors]; much less has anyone ported the
      code to use CTV+CSFS, limiting our ability to evaluate that
      combination for LN-Symmetry.

      Poinsot [asks][poinsot ctvcsfs1] whether implementing LN-Symmetry
      would actually be a priority for LN developers if a soft fork
      making it possible was activated.  Quotes from two Core Lightning
      developers (also co-authors of the paper introducing what we now
      call LN-Symmetry) indicated that it was a priority for them.  A

>       quote from an LDK developer did not show it to be a priority.

Reviewer 2: Did it not show that it was a priority or did it show not to be a priority?

```suggestion
      quote from an LDK developer showed it not to be a priority.
```

Author: Grr, I think I need to stop reporting on anything contained in a Twitter thread.  When I read @ajtowns's [link](https://x.com/TheBlueMatt/status/1859070516956389704), I only saw a subset of the conversation and AJ's conclusion seemed only weakly supported (at best).  I just checked again and it's clearly showing me an upthread post with Matt saying "I don't find eltoo all that interesting in terms of 'we need to get this done'".

I'll revise to use stronger language; thanks for double checking.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, Matt has been of the position that Lightning needs a penalty for some time, so he is not particularly interested in LN Symmetry

>     - *Ark:* Roose is CEO of a business building an [Ark][topic ark]

Reviewer 2: Stumbled here, perhaps needs an article
```suggestion
    - *Ark:* Roose is the CEO of a business building an [Ark][topic ark]
```

      implementation.  He says "CTV is a game-changer for Ark [...] the
      benefits of CTV to the user experience are undeniable, and it is
      without doubt that both [Ark] implementations will utilize CTV as
      soon as it is available."  Towns [noted][towns nonrepo] that
      nobody has implemented Ark with either APO or CTV for testing;
      Roose wrote [code][roose ctv-ark] doing that shortly thereafter,
      calling it "remarkably straightforward" and saying that it passed
      the existing implementation's integration tests.  He quantified
      some of the improvements: if they switched to CTV, "we could net
      remove about 900 lines of code [...] and reduce our own round
      protocol to [two] instead of three, [plus] the bandwidth
      improvement for not having to pass around signing nonces and
      partial signatures."

      Roose would later start a separate thread for discussing the

>       benefits of CTV to users of Ark (see our summary below).

Author: Leaving as-is.  Can't explain why, but I prefer the longer version.

      of transactions will eventually expire and allow the server to claim
      the funds.  This is not theft---it's an expected part of the
      protocol---and the server may choose to return some or all of the
      claimed funds to the user in some way.  Until the expiry approaches,
      the receiver can just wait.

      In the pathological case, the server and spender can (at any time)
      collude to sign an alternative chain of transactions to steal the
      funds sent to the receiver.  Note: Bitcoin's privacy properties
      allow both the server and the sender to be the same person, so
      collusion might not even be required.  However, if the receiver
      keeps a copy of the chain of transactions cosigned by the server,
      they can prove that the server stole funds, which might be
      sufficient to deter other people from using that server.

    - *Refresh:* with server cooperation, the receiver can atomically
      transfer ownership over the funds in the spender-cosigned
      transaction for another presigned transaction with the receiver as
      cosigner.  This extends the expiration date and eliminates the

>       ability for the server and previous sender to collude to steal the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      ability for the server and previous spender to collude to steal the
```

      non-revelation of HTLC preimages creating problems for Lightning
      Service Providers (LSPs).  LSPs currently address that problem
      through the introduction of trust-based mechanisms (see
      [Newsletter #256][news256 ln-jit]).  If the same solutions were
      planned to be used with CTV-Ark, those solutions would also seem
      to safely allow in-round acceptance of LN payments in clArk.

    - *Fewer rounds, fewer signatures, and less storage:* clArk uses
      [musig2][topic musig] and each party needs to participate in
      multiple rounds, generate multiple partial signatures, and store
      completed signatures.  With CTV, less data would need to be
      generated and stored and less interaction would be required.

- OP_CCV amount semantic FIXME:harding

- Consensus cleanup draft BIPs FIXME:harding

  - Mention nSequence https://delvingbitcoin.org/t/great-consensus-cleanup-revival/710/79

## Releases and release candidates

_New releases and release candidates for popular Bitcoin infrastructure
projects.  Please consider upgrading to new releases or helping to test
release candidates._

> - [Bitcoin Core 29.0rc2][] is a release candidate for the next major

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Bitcoin Core 29.0rc3][] is a release candidate for the next major
```

## Notable code and documentation changes

_Notable recent changes in [Bitcoin Core][bitcoin core repo], [Core
Lightning][core lightning repo], [Eclair][eclair repo], [LDK][ldk repo],
[LND][lnd repo], [libsecp256k1][libsecp256k1 repo], [Hardware Wallet
Interface (HWI)][hwi repo], [Rust Bitcoin][rust bitcoin repo], [BTCPay
Server][btcpay server repo], [BDK][bdk repo], [Bitcoin Improvement
Proposals (BIPs)][bips repo], [Lightning BOLTs][bolts repo],
[Lightning BLIPs][blips repo], [Bitcoin Inquisition][bitcoin inquisition
repo], and [BINANAs][binana repo]._

- [Bitcoin Core #31363][] cluster mempool: introduce TxGraph

- [Bitcoin Core #31278][] wallet, rpc: deprecate settxfee and paytxfee

- [Eclair #3050][] Relay non-blinded failure from wallet nodes

- [Eclair #2963][] Use package relay for anchor force-close

- [Eclair #3045][] Optional `payment_secret` in trampoline outer payload

- [LDK #3670][] Handle receiving payments via Trampoline

- [LND #9620][] chain: add testnet4 support

{% include snippets/recap-ad.md when="2025-04-08 15:30" %}
{% include references.md %}
{% include linkers/issues.md v=2 issues="31363,31278,3050,2963,3045,3670,9620" %}

> [bitcoin core 29.0rc2]: https://bitcoincore.org/bin/bitcoin-core-29.0/

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[bitcoin core 29.0rc3]: https://bitcoincore.org/bin/bitcoin-core-29.0/
```

    schnorr signatures] were insecure (e.g., after fast quantum
    computers existed).  If the UTXO contained a SHA256 commitment (or
    other quantum-resistant commitment) to a preimage that had never
    previously been revealed, then a multistep protocol for revealing
    that preimage could be combined with a consensus change to prevent quantum theft.  This is
    fundamentally the same as a [previous proposal][ruffing gfsig] by
    Tim Ruffing (see [Newsletter #141][news141 gfsig]), which he learned
    is generally known as the [Guy Fawkes signature scheme][].  It's
    also a variant of a [scheme][back crsig] Adam Back invented in 2013
    to improve resistance against miner censorship.  In short, the
    protocol could work like this:

    1. Alice receives funds to an output that, in some way, makes a
       SHA256 commitment.  This can be a directly hashed output, such as
       P2PKH, P2SH, P2WPKH, or P2WSH---or it can be [P2TR][topic
       taproot] output with a script path.

    2. If Alice receives multiple payments to the same output script,
       she must either not spend any of them until she's ready to spend

>        all of them (definitely required for P2PKH and P2WSH; probably

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
       all of them (definitely required for P2PKH and P2WPKH; probably
```

It is followed by `also practically required for P2SH and P2WSH`, so is this `P2WPKH` instead of `P2WSH`?

  cover the vast majority of the desirable amount checks in practice."

  He also notes that he "implemented fully featured vaults using
  `OP_CCV` plus [OP_CTV][topic op_checktemplateverify] that are roughly
  equivalent to [...[BIP345][]...]  Moreover, a reduced-functionality
  version using just `OP_CCV` is implemented as a functional test in the
  Bitcoin Core implementation of `OP_CCV`."

- **Draft BIP published for consensus cleanup:** Antoine Poinsot
  [posted][poinsot cleanup] to the Bitcoin-Dev mailing list a link to a
  [draft BIP][cleanup bip] he's written for the [consensus cleanup][topic
  consensus cleanup] soft fork proposal.  It includes several fixes:

  - Fixes for two different [time warp][topic time warp] attacks that
    could be used by a majority of hashrate to produce blocks at an
    accelerated rate.

  - A signature operations (sigops) execution limit on legacy
    transactions to prevent the creation of excessively slow-to-validate
    blocks.

  - A fix for [BIP34][] coinbase transaction uniqueness that should
    fully prevent [duplicate transactions][topic duplicate transactions].

>   - Invalidation of future 64-byte transaction (calculated using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Invalidation of future 64-byte transactions (calculated using
```

    stripped size) to prevent a type of [merkle tree
    vulnerability][topic merkle tree vulnerabilities].

  Technical replies were favorable for all but two parts of the

>   proposal.  The first objection, made in several replies, was to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  proposal.  The first objection, made in several replies, was to the
```

  invalidation of 64-byte transactions.  The replies restated previous
  criticism (see [Newsletter #319][news319 64byte]).  An alternative
  method for addressing merkle tree vulnerabilities exists.  That method
  is relatively easy for lightweight (SPV) wallets to use but might
  present challenges to SPV validation in smart contracts, such as
  _bridges_ between Bitcoin and other systems.  Sjors Provoost
  [suggested][provoost bridge] someone implementing an
  onchain-enforcable bridge provide code illustrating the difference

>   between being able to assume 64 byte transactions don't exist and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  between being able to assume 64-byte transactions don't exist and
```

  having to use the alternative method for preventing merkle tree
  vulnerabilities.

  The second objection was about a late change to the ideas include in
  the BIP, which was described in a [post][poinsot nsequence] on Delving

>   Bitcoin by Poinsot.  The change is requiring blocks made after

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Bitcoin by Poinsot.  The change requires blocks made after
```

>   activation of consensus cleanup to set the flag that ensures makes
>   their locktime enforcable.  As previously proposed, coinbase

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  activation of consensus cleanup to set the flag that ensures
  their locktime is enforceable.  As previously proposed, coinbase
```

  Eclair overrides it with `TemporaryNodeFailure` to avoid revealing details
  about [unannounced channels][topic unannounced channels]. For [blinded
  routes][topic rv routing] involving other nodes, Eclair continues to override
  failures with `invalidOnionBlinding`. All failure messages are encrypted using
  the wallet’s `blinded_node_id`.

- [Eclair #2963][] implements 1p1c [package relay][topic package relay] by
  calling Bitcoin Core’s `submitpackage` RPC command during channel force
  closures to broadcast both the commitment transaction and its anchor together.
  This allows commitment transactions to propagate even if their feerate is
  below the mempool minimum, but requires connecting to peers running Bitcoin
  Core 28.0 or later. This change removes the need to dynamically set the
  feerate of commitment transactions, and ensures that force closures don’t get
  stuck when nodes disagree on the current feerate.

- [Eclair #3045][] makes the `payment_secret` field in the outer onion payload
  optional for single-part [trampoline payments][topic trampoline payments].
  Previously, every trampoline payment included a `payment_secret`, even if

>   [multipath payments][topic multipath payments] (MPP) wasn't used. Since

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  [multipath payments][topic multipath payments] (MPP) weren't used. Since
```

      user in the round---after which the user could disclose the HTLC
      preimage to claim the payment.  However, Roose noted that this
      would still require the use of "various anti-abuse measures" (we
      believe that this is because of the risk of the receiver failing
      to disclose the preimage, leading to the server's funds remaining
      locked until the end of the Ark round, which might extend for two
      or more months).

      David Harding [replied][harding ctv-ark-ln] to Roose asking for
      additional details and comparing the situation to LN [JIT
      channels][topic jit channels], which have a similar problem with
      non-revelation of HTLC preimages creating problems for Lightning
      Service Providers (LSPs).  LSPs currently address that problem
      through the introduction of trust-based mechanisms (see
      [Newsletter #256][news256 ln-jit]).  If the same solutions were
      planned to be used with CTV-Ark, those solutions would also seem
      to safely allow in-round acceptance of LN payments in clArk.

    - *Fewer rounds, fewer signatures, and less storage:* clArk uses

>       [musig2][topic musig], and each party needs to participate in

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      [MuSig2][topic musig], and each party needs to participate in
```

    blocks.

  - A fix for [BIP34][] coinbase transaction uniqueness that should
    fully prevent [duplicate transactions][topic duplicate transactions].

  - Invalidation of future 64-byte transactions (calculated using
    stripped size) to prevent a type of [merkle tree
    vulnerability][topic merkle tree vulnerabilities].

  Technical replies were favorable for all but two parts of the
  proposal.  The first objection, made in several replies, was to the
  invalidation of 64-byte transactions.  The replies restated previous
  criticism (see [Newsletter #319][news319 64byte]).  An alternative
  method for addressing merkle tree vulnerabilities exists.  That method
  is relatively easy for lightweight (SPV) wallets to use but might
  present challenges to SPV validation in smart contracts, such as
  _bridges_ between Bitcoin and other systems.  Sjors Provoost
  [suggested][provoost bridge] someone implementing an
  onchain-enforceable bridge provide code illustrating the difference
  between being able to assume 64-byte transactions don't exist and
  having to use the alternative method for preventing merkle tree
  vulnerabilities.

>   The second objection was about a late change to the ideas include in

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  The second objection was about a late change to the ideas included in
```

  exactly the same values in a past coinbase transaction as will be used
  in a future coinbase transaction prevents the duplicate transactions
  vulnerability.  The objection to this proposal was that it wasn't
  clear whether all miners are capable of setting the locktime
  enforcement flag.

## Releases and release candidates

_New releases and release candidates for popular Bitcoin infrastructure
projects.  Please consider upgrading to new releases or helping to test
release candidates._

- [BDK wallet 1.2.0][] adds flexibility for sending payments to custom
  scripts, fixes an edge case related to coinbase transactions, and
  includes several other features and bug fixes.

- [LDK v0.1.2][] is a release of this library for building LN-enabled
  applications.  It contains several performance improvements and bug
  fixes.

- [Bitcoin Core 29.0rc3][] is a release candidate for the next major
  version of the network's predominate full node.  Please see the
  [version 29 testing guide][bcc29 testing guide].

- [LND 0.19.0-beta.rc1][] is a release candidate for this popular LN
  node.  One of the major improvements that could probably use testing

>   is the new RBF-based fee bumping for cooperative closes described
>   below in the notable code changes section.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  is the new RBF-based fee bumping for cooperative closes.
```

      completed signatures.  With CTV, less data would need to be
      generated and stored and less interaction would be required.

- **OP_CHECKCONTRACTVERIFY semantics:** Salvatore Ingala
  [posted][ingala ccv] to Delving Bitcoin to describe the semantics of
  the proposed [OP_CHECKCONTRACTVERIFY][topic matt] (CCV) opcode, link

>   to a [first draft BIP][ccv bip], and link to a [implementation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  to a [first draft BIP][ccv bip], and link to an [implementation
```

    tracked.  For example, if the output being spent at index three is
    worth 100 BTC and the output being created at index three is worth
    70 BTC, then the code keeps track of the residual 30 BTC.  The
    transaction is marked as invalid if the output being created is
    greater than the output being spent (as that would reduce the
    residual value, perhaps below zero).

  - *Default:* mark the transaction invalid unless the amount of output
    being created at a particular index is greater than the amount of
    the output being spent plus the sum of any previous residuals that
    haven't been used with a _default_ check yet.

  A transaction is valid if any output is checked more than once with
  _deduct_ or if both _deduct_ and _default_ are used on the same
  output.

  Ingala provides several visual examples of combinations of the above
  operations.  Here's our textual description of his "send partial
  amount" example, which might be useful for a [vault][topic vaults]: a
  transaction has one input (spending one output) worth 100 BTC and two
  outputs, one for 70 BTC and the other for 30 BTC.  CCV is run twice

>   during validation of the input:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  during input validation:
```
Or maybe "while validating the input"
Or maybe "during the validation of the input"

  1. CCV with _deduct_ operates index 0 for 100 BTC spent to 70 BTC
     created, giving a residual of 30.  In a [BIP345][]-style vault, CCV
     would be returning that 70 BTC back to the same script it was
     previously secured by.

>   2. The second time, it uses _default_ on index 1.  Although there's an
>      output being created at index 1 in this transaction, there's no

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  2. The second time, it uses _default_ on index 1.  Although an
     output is created at index 1 in this transaction, there's no
```

Author: Leaving as-is so that we use the same "output being created" term here as we use in the rest of the section.
